Initial commit for a tutorial on getting started with kustomize (#4516)
kubernetes-sigs/kustomize: site/content/en/docs/Getting started/first_kustomization.md

date: 2022-02-27
weight: 20
description: >
  A step by step tutorial for absolute kustomize beginners
---

This page will help you get started with this amazing tool called kustomize! We will start off with a simple nginx deployment manifest and then use it to explore kustomize basics.

### Create your resource manifests and Kustomization

Let's start off by creating our nginx deployment and service manifests in a dedicated folder:

```bash
mkdir kustomize-example-1
cd kustomize-example-1

cat <<'EOF' >deployment.yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    app: nginx
  name: nginx
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
EOF

cat <<'EOF' >service.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    app: nginx
  name: nginx
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: nginx
EOF
```

> Now that we have our `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` files created, let's create our Kustomization. We can think of Kustomization as the set of instructions that tell kustomize what it needs to do, and is defined in a file named `kustomization.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have our `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` files created, let's create our Kustomization. We can think of Kustomization as the set of instructions that tell kustomize what it needs to do, and it is defined in a file named `kustomization.yaml`:
```

spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

### Create variants using overlays

Now let's assume we need to deploy the nginx manifests from the previous section to two environments called `Staging` and `Production`. The manifests for these two environments will be mostly identical, with only a few minor changes between them. We call these two mostly identical manifests "variants". Traditionally to create variants, we could duplicate the manifests and apply the changes manually or rely on some templating engine. With kustomize, we can avoid templating and duplication of our manifests and apply the different changes we need using overlays. With this approach, the `base` would contain the common part of the our variants and the `overlays` contain our environment specific changes.

Create the folder structure for the next example with bases and overlays:

```bash
mkdir -p kustomize-example-2/base kustomize-example-2/overlays/staging kustomize-example-2/overlays/production

> cd kustomize-example-2

Reviewer: Do you feel strongly about restarting from scratch as of this step, vs. moving the existing files they've made into a new subdir? As it is this makes me wonder if it should be a second tutorial, since it is independent of what they've done so far.

Author: Not really, I started from scratch to avoid having to make them undo changes and keep the name short, can think of how to update later this week

Author: @KnVerey consolidated into one folder

date: 2022-02-27
weight: 20
description: >
  A step by step tutorial for absolute kustomize beginners
---

> This page is intended to help you get started with using this amazing tool called kustomize! We will start off with creating a simple nginx deployment manifest and then use it as an example to explore kustomize basics.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a style guide on how we want to write the word kustomize consistently?
* Kustomize?
* kustomize?
* `kustomize`?

I'm a fan of the last one but things can be a bit cluttered sometimes when you have too many words in backticks flying around.

Reviewer 3: I prefer the second one, the word kustomize will be used a lot and back ticking every single one will start to decrease its emphasis and/or may get annoying to look at.

> This page is intended to help you get started with using this amazing tool called kustomize! We will start off with creating a simple nginx deployment manifest and then use it as an example to explore kustomize basics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This page will help you get started with this amazing tool called kustomize! We will start off with a simple nginx deployment manifest and then use it to explore kustomize basics.
```

### Create initial manifests and directory structure

> Let's start off by creating our nginx deployment and service manifests in a dedicated folder structure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's start off by creating our nginx deployment and service manifests in a dedicated folder structure.
```

```bash
mkdir -p kustomize-example/base kustomize-example/overlays/staging kustomize-example/overlays/production
cd kustomize-example

cat <<'EOF' >base/deployment.yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    app: nginx
  name: nginx
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
EOF

cat <<'EOF' >base/service.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    app: nginx
  name: nginx
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: nginx
EOF
```

> Now that we have our `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` files created, let's create our `kustomization.yaml`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that we have our `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` files created, let's create our Kustomization. [Insert brief explanation of what a Kustomization is], and is defined in a file named `kustomization.yaml`:
```

Author: Will add the explanation

```bash
cat <<'EOF' >base/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- deployment.yaml
- service.yaml
EOF
```

> In this `kustomization.yaml` file, all that we are doing is telling kustomize to include the `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` as resources for it to use. So if we now run `kustomize build base/` from our current working directory, all kustomize will do at this point is to generate a manifest which contains the contents of our `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` files with no additional changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this kustomization file, we are telling kustomize to include the `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` as its resources. If we now run `kustomize build base` from our current working directory, kustomize will generate a manifest containing the contents of our `deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml` files with no additional changes.
```

```yaml

> $ kustomize build base/

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$ kustomize build base
```

        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

### What are Bases and Overlays?

> Let's think of a scenario where we need to deploy the nginx manifests from the previous section to 2 environments called `Staging` and `Production`, however although most of the manifest is the same for both environments we need to apply some environment specific changes.  Traditionally we could duplicate the manifests and apply the changes manually or rely on some templating engine. With kustomize we can avoid templating and duplication of our manifests and apply the different changes we need using overlays.  With this approach, the `base` would contain the common part of the our manifests and the `overlays` contain our environment specific changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's think of a scenario where we need to deploy the nginx manifests from the previous section to two environments called `Staging` and `Production`. The manifests for these two environments will be mostly identical, with only a few minor changes between them. Traditionally to achieve these changes, we could duplicate the manifests and apply the changes manually or rely on some templating engine. With kustomize we can avoid templating and duplication of our manifests and apply the different changes we need using overlays. With this approach, the `base` would contain the common part of the our manifests and the `overlays` contain our environment specific changes.
```
The first sentence feels a little long to me, wdyt?

To continue with this tutorial, create the `kustomization.yaml` files for our two overlays:

```bash
cat <<'EOF' >overlays/staging/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- ../../base
EOF

cat <<'EOF' >overlays/production/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- ../../base
EOF
```

> The `kustomization.yaml` files in the overlays are just including the `base` folder, so if you were to run `kustomize build` on the overlay folders at this point you would get the same output we got when we built `base`. The directory structure you created so far should look like this:

Author: agreed, I have added this in the build code blocks

```
kustomize-example
├── base
│   ├── deployment.yaml
│   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   └── service.yaml
└── overlays
    ├── production
    │   └── kustomization.yaml
    └── staging
        └── kustomization.yaml
```

### Customising our overlays

For the purposes our example, let's define some requirements of how our deployment should look like in the two environments:

|Requirement|         Production         |         Staging         |
|-----------|----------------------------|-------------------------|
|Name       |overlay1-nginx-production   |overlay2-nginx-staging   |
|Namespace  |production                  |staging                  |
|Replicas   |3                           |2                        |

> We can achieve the names required by making use of `namePrefix` and `nameSuffix` as follows:

Reviewer 2: Do we have an actual name for things like `namePrefix`, `nameSuffix`, `namespace`, etc as we define in a `kustomization.yaml` file? Directives, commands, something else?

Author: I avoided using a name to refer to these because I was unsure if they had one... @natasha41575 ?

Reviewer 3: > Do we have an actual name for things like namePrefix, nameSuffix, namespace, etc as we define in a kustomization.yaml file? Directives, commands, something else?

I usually call them "fields in the kustomization file", "kustomization fields", etc

Author: I saw in some of the docs that they are referred to as fields in some cases and I like the sound of directives for these more than fields, but thinking more about it maybe we have to be a bit careful about introducing new terms since they can also be referred to as transformers? Or define that directives and transformers may be used interchangeably?

Reviewer: My two cents: They can be "fields" when you're talking about the literal key you put into a Kustomization file, "transformers" when you're talking about the code that drives their functionality, or maybe "features" when you're being really abstract. "Directives" is already a (somewhat obscure) feature in this space: [patch directives](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-api-machinery/strategic-merge-patch.md#basic-patch-format).

> _Production overlay kustomization.yaml_:

Author: I like the suggestion, have updated this as well.  It would be nice if there could be a way to make this comment be an actual title for the code block, but haven't figured out if there's a way to do it or if it is possible yet

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

namePrefix: overlay1-
nameSuffix: -production

resources:
- ../../base
```

_Staging overlay kustomization.yaml_:
```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

namePrefix: overlay2-
nameSuffix: -staging

resources:
- ../../base
```

The build output for our Production overlay would now be:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    app: nginx
  name: overlay1-nginx-production    ### service name changed here
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: nginx
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    app: nginx
  name: overlay1-nginx-production    ### deployment name changed here
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

> It is important to note here that the name for _both_ the `deployment` and the `service` were updated the with namePrefix and nameSuffix defined. If we had additional kubernetes objects (like an ingress) their name would be updated as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to note here that the name for _both_ the `deployment` and the `service` were updated the with `namePrefix` and `nameSuffix` defined. If we had additional kubernetes objects (like an `ingress`) their name would be updated as well.
```

        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

> 

Reviewer 3: It creates a bit of a harsh discontinuity to suddenly go from "here are some unchanged resources" to suddenly "bases and overlays"; I think it would be a good idea to include right here the other sections you were planning to add for the various fields (like namePrefix, labeels, etc), and have bases/overlays followed by components at the end. 

WDYT? We don't have to add all of that content in this PR, but maybe we can add a # TODO here.

Author: To be honest, I felt a bit the same about this when I was writing it and I was split between first applying the changes in one kustomization file and then moving on to overlays... I think you have a very valid point, so I could re-work it to show the changes without overlays (maybe just for the basic bits like nameprefix/suffix and namespace, and then have a section where we migrate it across to overlays and continue with examples for the other fields, what do you think?

Reviewer: Personally I like the progressive approach, more or less what you have here. I would suggest removing the creation of the overlay directories until you need them, and not ever making them revert something they've done in a previous step. I'd also suggest making the headings imperative instead of questions, so that the progression is e.g.:
- Create your resource manifests
- Create your Kustomization
- Customize your resources
- Create variants using overlays
- Customize your overlays

Author: Thanks for the feedback, pushed some updates

### What are Bases and Overlays?

> Let's think of a scenario where we need to deploy the nginx manifests from the previous section to two environments called `Staging` and `Production`. The manifests for these two environments will be mostly identical, with only a few minor changes between them. Traditionally to achieve these changes, we could duplicate the manifests and apply the changes manually or rely on some templating engine. With kustomize we can avoid templating and duplication of our manifests and apply the different changes we need using overlays. With this approach, the `base` would contain the common part of the our manifests and the `overlays` contain our environment specific changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now let's assume we need to deploy the nginx manifests from the previous section to two environments called `Staging` and `Production`. The manifests for these two environments will be mostly identical, with only a few minor changes between them. We call these two mostly identical manifests "variants". Traditionally to create variants, we could duplicate the manifests and apply the changes manually or rely on some templating engine. With kustomize, we can avoid templating and duplication of our manifests and apply the different changes we need using overlays. With this approach, the `base` would contain the common part of the our variants and the `overlays` contain our environment specific changes.
```

Reviewer 3: Also this is a great explanation

> To continue with this tutorial, create the `kustomization.yaml` files for our two overlays:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create the `kustomization.yaml` files for our two overlays:
```

```bash
cat <<'EOF' >overlays/staging/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- ../../base
EOF

cat <<'EOF' >overlays/production/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:

> - ../../base

Reviewer 3: Do you think it's worth adding a sentence somewhere about how bases can be specified in the same field as other resources?

Author: Yes, will add that

Reviewer: Since this is a tutorial, I'd actually avoid explaining things we aren't demonstrating through the walkthrough itself. That said, we could have a section on adding a resource to one of the variants.

EOF
```

> The `kustomization.yaml` files in the overlays are just including the `base` folder, so if you were to run `kustomize build` on the overlay folders at this point you would get the same output we got when we built `base`. The directory structure you created so far should look like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The kustomization files for the overlays include just `base` folder, so if you were to run `kustomize build` on the overlay folders at this point you would get the same output we got when we built `base`. The directory structure you created so far should look like this:
```

        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
EOF

cat <<'EOF' >base/service.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    app: nginx
  name: nginx
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: nginx
EOF

cat <<'EOF' >overlays/staging/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- ../../base
EOF

cat <<'EOF' >overlays/production/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- ../../base
EOF
```

> The kustomization files for the overlays include just `base` folder, so if you were to run `kustomize build` on the overlay folders at this point you would get the same output you would get if you built `base`.  It is important to note that bases can be included in the `resources` field in the same way that we included our other deployment and service resource files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kustomization files for the overlays include just the `base` folder, so if you were to run `kustomize build` on the overlay folders at this point you would get the same output you would get if you built `base`.  It is important to note that bases can be included in the `resources` field in the same way that we included our other deployment and service resource files.
```

Moving on to our next requirements, we can set the namespace and the number of replicas we want by using `namespace` and `replicas` respectively:

_kustomize-example/overlays/production/kustomization.yaml_:
```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

namePrefix: env1-
nameSuffix: -production

namespace: production

replicas:
- name: example-nginx
  count: 3

resources:
- ../../base
```

_kustomize-example/overlays/staging/kustomization.yaml_:
```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

namePrefix: env2-
nameSuffix: -staging

namespace: staging

replicas:

> - name: example-nginx

Author: @natasha41575 @KnVerey putting just `nginx` works here even though we are updating a resource coming from the base, is this expected?

Reviewer: Yep, under the hood, the name reference transformer keeps track of all the names objects have had throughout the build, and as long as there's no ambiguity, it will successfully resolve the names either way.
